---
layout: post
title: NixOS - The Love-Hate Relationship
---

As a developer, I always dreamed of an OS setup that can be easily
version controlled, replicated on new machines, install and uninstall
software packages without leaving garbage files around, upgrade to a
new OS version without busting the whole OS.

NixOS delivers many of these promises but comes with its own type of
issues.

When I first learned about Nix, I was very curious. I have been mostly
using Debian based systems like Ubuntu, and they tend to have old
versions. Stable old versions are good for databases and standard
tools. But the day-to-day work happens in different programming
languages with different versions that are likely not the same as the
one that comes with the OS. So I tend to use various tools like asdf,
rvm, etc to manage programming language versions.

The idea of using a single tool to manage all these appealed to me. I
installed the Nix package manager on Ubuntu and started to use it. It was
flawless for managing command line tools, but once I tried to use it
for managing GUI apps, I started to face many issues. The main issue
seems to be the Gnome installed by Ubuntu might not be playing well
with the Nix installed GUI apps as they might be built against
different Gnome versions.

NixOS is supposed to solve the GUI related issues, so I decided to
give it a try. The idea of all the OS configuration controlled by a
single file `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` appealed to me. It's
trivial to keep this file under version control.

After a couple of days, I tried to install an npm package that
downloaded pre-compiled binary. The binary failed to run which turns
out to be an issue with [NixOS](http://sandervanderburg.blogspot.com/2011/11/on-nix-nixos-and-filesystem-hierarchy.html) not following the [FHS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Filesystem_Hierarchy_Standard)
standard.

Another major issue is, except `/bin/sh` and `/usr/bin/env`, none of
the binaries will go under `/bin` or `/usr/bin` directory. That means,
all the bash scripts out there with hard-coded `#!/bin/bash` shebang
will not run.

As much as I like NixOS, both of the above issues introduce a lot of
friction on daily usage. There are some escape hatches available for
both of the issues like `steam-run` and `buildFHSUserEnv`, but you
still need to figure the issue is due to the above and not something
else. This is easier said than done when the issue happens somewhere
deep and the error message doesn't reveal much.

All that said, I am still using NixOS as my daily driver for all
development related work for the last six months. I am not sure how
long it will last till I run into something I can't fix.
